---
layout: post
Title: There's No Bad Guy
---

There's this common trend in theories critical of the capitalist system, whether it's Marx, Deleuze or even the Unabomber, that depicts this ruling class (the exploitative class, the bourgeoisie, the rulers) as this nefarious, greedy, malicious, evil, self-indulgent, meticulous actors who act knowingly harming others for their own benefit.
Basically the archetype of a 'villain'. These include big company's CEOs, business managers, advertising agents, chiefs of industry, monopolists... anyone who has major power over the masses and can exert some sort of social control over them.
Although almost everything about these theories is pretty spot on (and trust me, I'm very fond of these narratives), I cannot agree with this vilification of the ruling class.

Unfortunately, out of pure naivety, I ended up doing my master's degree in a business and economics school.
What this meant for me is that I got to be lectured by a part of this 'greedy powerful evil elite'. 
And you know what? It's worse than I thought. They actually think they are doing good. That somehow, exploiting people works for the prosperity of society. That blatantly lying to the public for organisations benefit is correct: after all they don't know better.
That by seeking individual interest can somehow magically work towards the collective societal interest (which is just nuts). 
That they are actually valued solely on their merit and not on any kind of privilege, completely oblivious that only time Smith such absurdity was as a joke.
They are just as clueless as the 'exploited' class, or actually even more.
That's the power of the capitalist narrative: it reaches everyone, specially the top.

And thinking a little about it, it's not hard to see why. If there is anyone who can actually belive that a system can create prosperity is if they themselves have a prosperous position. I know there are unfortunately poor people believing in this narrative, but it's easy to understand why someone who lived first hand the miserableness of poverty would be more open to question the system he was born into. 

Yet there's no doubt that there is a very select few of them who fit the 'bad guy' role. 
That are clearly aware that what they do is blatantly wrong, but yet do it anyway. 
Either because they have a nihilistic (maybe even just vain) position and proudly announce how indifferent to people's suffering (a Kevin O'Leary type). Or have that defeated position that if the system is screwed up we might as well just benefit from it, which is kind of a childish way to put the blame of your actions on others: 'It's not me, it's the system'.

And that's the main reason why while devouring the views of critical theory, I usually end up disagreeing with their proposed solution.
It is not the ruling class we have to fight against, but the whole capitalist narritive. 
The one that makes people believe the system is fair. 
That there is such thing as a meritocracy.
That value and price are aligned.
That the pursuit of profit is benefitial.
That a human life is only worth what it can produce.
That constant comsumption in the normal way of living.
That the path to freedom is capital.
And so on.
That's what needs to change.
Not 'killing the oppressor'.
Not 'ceasing the means of production'.
But simply changing the narrative away from capitalism.






